---
layout: article
title: June 2 Web Dev Notes
permalink: /2015/06/02/overview/
---
**Problem:** Waking up early hurts my brain. I spent the entire morning in a fog, unable to decide what to learn next. When I&#39;m in this half-conscious, indecisive state of lazy curiosity, I easily get sucked into watching video tutorials without paying attention and browsing lists of tutorials instead of actually _reading_ them!

**Solutions to try next:** every evening, write down a specific goal to focus on the next morning. The goal has to be phrased in the form of a _deliverable_, an _outcome_, a _completed_ feature! (Also, maybe try more caffeine.)

**Cool stuff I found:**

*   [Mixture](http://mixture.io/), a free front-end web dev toolset with some very cool features

**Today I learned:**

*   Nothing specific or tangible enough to articulate, because I was scatter-brained all day long  :(

**Questions:**

*   How do you use [Sass](http://sass-lang.com/) (the CSS preprocessor)?
*   How do you use [Mixture](http://mixture.io/) (especially with local WordPress development)?
*   What are the best tools for live-reloading webpages while editing the code?

**Goals for tomorrow:**

*   Spend 25 minutes sketching ideas for the meetup group website&#39;s homepage to generate ideas for content and layout.
*   Then spend about 15 minutes writing down all of my questions regarding how to implement those ideas.
*   Implement at least one new feature for the meetup website and answer at least one of those questions thoroughly.
*   Repeat today&#39;s process, creating a blog post with all of the same sections -- especially this last section!