---
layout: article
title: June 15 Web Dev Notes
permalink: /2015/06/15/overview/
---

**Personal check-in:** I'm noticing a trend: if I skip a day, then I skip an entire week! Oops. After the rush of the hackathon, I spent the next couple mornings cleaning and unpacking and organizing stuff in my new apartment. My relentless headache/eye strain returned last week, so I avoided using the computer in my free time. I finally got my eye exam today and confirmed that my eyeballs are completely healthy, but I might need glasses! Well, at least maybe it'll add to my nerd cred a little bit.

In between resting my eyes and catching up on some chores, I'm reviewing the very basics of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Whenever I follow somebody else's tutorial, I start thinking about how much I want to create my own! Or maybe a book, maybe a video series, maybe an interactive web app? I'm itching for another creative project that also gives me a chance to teach what I'm learning (aside from my meetup group and the collaborative python projects that we just started with 30 people split into 6 groups, which is a bit of a logistical nightmare but still very exciting). But I know I have a tendency to start crazy projects and never finish them, so I'm trying to take it easy this week and stick with a slow and steady pace.

**Today I reviewed:**

- Common HTML elemnts
- How to create HTML tables
- CSS syntax and common properties
- JavaScript arrays, loops, conditionals, functions, and objects

**Today I learned:**

- How to use a couple new CSS selectors, like the [`:nth-child`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:nth-child) structural pseudo-class!
- The `this` keyword can be used to create a function that can then be assigned as a method of more than one object.

**Questions:**
- What does "structural pseudo-class" actually mean?
- How do pixels and screen resolutions and relative measurements all fit together?
- What's the right way to use `inline-block` elements for creating layouts, and what browser quirks come with them?
- What other common metaphors for computer programming exist, aside from describing it as a recipe?
- Who came up with the DRY principle (Don't Repeat Yourself)?