---
layout: article
title: "2016 Week 2 Self-therapy vlog"
permalink: /2016/self-therapy-vlog-2/
---

The first week of January was eventful! I finished [100 video blogs in 100 days](/vlog/), gave a talk at a local high school, and started a course to learn computer science from first principles. But the focus of this week's self-therapy session is my anxiety -- more specifically, adult separation anxiety. I made some good progress, though! The strategy I came up with last week was a success, and I had a fun and short visit with my family and stuck with my original plan.

[**All weekly self-therapy vlogs**](/self-therapy-vlog/) / [**2016 goals and changelog**](/2016/)

<iframe width="1280" height="720" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ub310QxjA0E" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Personal changelog

The complete, regularly updated changelog is on my [2016 planning page](/2016/).

### Version 0.0.2, 2016 Week 2, January 10th

- **New rule:** instead of using words like "fix", "bug", "wrong", "fail" or "broken" when discussing my self-improvement project, I will only use positive or neutral words like "experiment", "observe", "accept" and improve". I don't *need* to change anything about myself; I just *want* to improve because I enjoy the process. **Self-acceptance means being able to say about *any* of my attributes, "That's not a bug, it's a feature!"**
- **New rule:** plan to arrive 30 minutes early to any event that makes me nervous so I can meditate before leaving my car.
- **New habit:** morning routine now includes a walk to another location for my first work session.
- **Removed:** volunteer math tutoring commitment. (Focusing on computer science related volunteer work instead.)
- **Postponed:** side project idea to relearn sections of Rhapsody in Blue, documenting it and reviewing old video footage of my 2014 practice sessions.

## Time breakdown

- Video production time: 1 hour 52 min
  - Filming/setup: 38 min
  - Video editing: 1 hour 2 min
  - Publishing: 12 min