---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 20th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/20/
cats:
  - daily
---

An early morning hike with a few friends got me out of bed nice and early today, and then I ventured out to meet new people and talk about loss and grieving at [The Dinner Party](http://thedinnerparty.org/). Other than that, it was a normal lazy Sunday.

{% include toc.html %}

## What I did today

  - With a few friends who were willing to wake up early, we went hiking at Switzer Falls from 8am until about 10am! Tiny waterfall, but beautiful trail! We also stopped at Panera Bread on the way back for a nice little breakfast.

  - I bought a few groceries and made a vegetable and noodle stir fry at home for this potluck dinner thing (see next bullet point).

  - I attended [The Dinner Party](http://thedinnerparty.org/) for the first time thanks to a friend's invitation and talked about the experience of losing a parent with a few other people my age who have also lost parents or siblings. I enjoyed that unique experience, but I'm not sure if I would want to attend on a regular basis.

  - I finished most of a tutorial on [Express](https://expressjs.com/), the NodeJS web server framework

  - At a friend's house, I watched "Game of Thrones" and ate pizza and had a nice, social Sunday evening!

## Notes on Express and NodeJS

  - Middleware is just a fancy name for any functions that access the request and response objects and run in sequence. Middleware functions just have to call the `next()` method to pass on control to the next function in the middleware stack.

  - The only built-in middleware for Express is `express-static` for serving static files.

  - Dynamic routes in Express in the form of `app.get('/:name')` are conveniently mapped to `request.params.name`. Nifty!

  - You can add objects to the `request.params` object by passing a middleware function to the `app.param()` method!

  - Using `express.Router()` acts like a middleware function, and all routes are relative to the path in which the router is mounted -- for example, with `app.use('/basepath', customRouter);`


## Gathering string

  - Today I heard from someone new who lived in Japan that there are female-only trains in Tokyo because of the combination of overcrowding and a systemic groping problem. That's pretty messed up!

  - Sometime I want to review [this free tutorial on Chrome's developer tools](https://www.codeschool.com/courses/discover-devtools)
