---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 13th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/13/
cats:
  - daily
  - social-alarm-clock
---

Today I had brunch with a bunch of women in tech friends, and I worked with a friend all afternoon to create a Slack bot application together! For some reason I felt extremely anxious throughout most of the day, but I'm glad I didn't let it stop me from spending time with friends and learning new things together.

{% include toc.html %}

## Real-time notes

**7:29am:** So sleepy! Today is definitely one of the more difficult early mornings so far. I really want to go back to sleep, but my justification is that I can still have a lazy Sunday morning even if I'm up early. I spent the first 20 minutes of my day debugging my [social alarm clock app](/social-alarm-clock) prototype so that I could finally read the next messages again. (I skipped reading a message the last couple days, and the app is configured so that it really does rely on me using the app *every* morning in order to set things up properly to work the next day.) I thanked my friend:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Morning <a href="https://twitter.com/darrellpayne">@darrellpayne</a>, thanks for the wakeup message via <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a>! :) I SO want to sleep more, but starting my day instead.</p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/896740423376412672">August 13, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

So before I start my day, I should make a quick list of issues with this prototype that I'll have to address at some point. Maybe this minimum viable product is *too* minimal to be viable!

**Social alarm app issues:**

  - I really need a better way to set my alarm goals! Would linking it to my Android app solve this?

  - If I skip a day, the app no longer works, because my janky solution in Firebase relies on timestamps from day to day. Is there an easy fix for that?

  - I still don't have any way to view my wakeup data easily, so I definitely want to get around to making a calendar or something showing my wakeup times for each day.

  - Maybe I should rebuild this prototype as a server-side app with my own database, because the limitations of Firebase are getting pretty annoying.

  - There's a peopel issue that will be much harder to solve: how do I deal with trolls, or with people who mean well but submit too many messages in a row that I find boring? Should I force people to log in with Twitter and maybe only let them submit one message at a time? Should I randomize the order of the messages instead of displaying them in the order they were submitted? Should I ask people to vote on or flag other messages to filter them somehow before they get to me?

That's enough of that for now. I'll take a little break here, maybe walk over to the usual coworking space, and then I think I'll do some math practice this morning and then see what else I want to do until that women-in-tech brunch.

**Wrapping up:** I just wanted to make a note here to remind myself that even though I had an all-day panic attack today and thought that I'd have to run away at any moment, I still got through the day just fine, managed to have some fun and learn something new, and that feeling of panic finally wore off on its own after I leaned into it and just kept moving forward. I was surrounded by friends all day long, met a few new people, and had a great coding session with a friend who I had never worked with before. We made a Slack bot together, or at least the start of one, that would be very useful to her and our shared community! She said she learned a lot from me and appreciated my help, and I remember feeling surpsied when I heard that, because I felt like I was barely treading water the entire time, like I didn't know what I was doing, and like I was about to crack at any moment. But I didn't, and I'm glad I stuck it out instead of coming up with an excuse to run away.


## Math practice notes

Now finished with 85% of 7th grade math on Khan Academy!

  - Today I reviewed cube roots! I was hoping there was a quick trick for identifying the root of a cube, but it looks like I just need to do a normal prime factorization to figure it out. But with this particular problem, I had no idea how to find the prime factorization! Turns out 343 is 7 cubed, but I never would have figure that out on my own, haha. At least not without a calculator. I need more practice at identifying factors.

  - When graphing a function, the "constant of proportionality" is the same as the slope. (So yes, all proportional relationships are just linear functions. And they always go through the origin.)


## Slack bot notes

**To set up a Slack bot, you'll need:**

  - A server (with HTTPS I think!) to host the code that controls the Slack bot (in our case, we're using Glitch)

  - A Slack team that you have admin access to

  - A new Slack app, which you can create here: https://api.slack.com/apps/new

  - Optionally, a new bot user to link to the Slack app

**Steps for setting up a Slack bot:**

  - After installing the Slack app into a team for testing, save the client ID and client secret as environment variables on the server

  - Activate incoming webhooks in the Slack app management page and copy the Bot User Oauth Access Token as another environment variable

  - On the "OAuth & Permissions" page in the Slack app management page, request the scopes for "incoming-webhook" and "chat:write:bot"

  - Activate interactive messages, enter a request URL, and possibly set up "event subscriptions" and [verify that request URL](https://api.slack.com/events/url_verification) first if it doesn't work

**Questions and things to look into later:**

  - What's the difference between a [bot user](https://api.slack.com/bot-users) and a [Slack app](https://api.slack.com/slack-apps)? (So far, I think bot users are optional components that can be used with Slack apps, but a Slack app can also send messages on behalf of a human user.)

  - Take another look at their [tutorial on local Slack bot development with ngrok](https://api.slack.com/tutorials/tunneling-with-ngrok)

  - Review the [Slack hello world tutorial](https://api.slack.com/tutorials/slack-apps-hello-world)

  - [Interactive messages overview](https://api.slack.com/interactive-messages)

  - [Interactive messages tutorial](https://api.slack.com/tutorials/intro-to-message-buttons)

  - [Message builder tool](https://api.slack.com/docs/messages/builder)


## Slack bot JavaScript code snippets

**To get a list of users:**

```javascript
// GET LIST OF USERS  
slack.users.list({
    token: token
  }, (err, data) => { console.log(err, data); });
```

**To send a direct message to a user:**

```javascript
// NOTE: Should rewrite this with promises or async/await
// STEP 1: Open a new channel to start a direct message with a user
slack.im.open({
  token: token,
  user: '[USER ID GOES HERE]'
}, (err, data) => {

  if (err) {
    console.log(err);
  } else {
  	console.log(data);

    // STEP 2: Send a message to the private channel that was just opened
    slack.chat.postMessage({
      token: token,
      channel: data.channel.id,
      text: 'This is a private message!'
    }, (err, data) => { console.log(err, data);})
  }
});
```

**To send an interactive message to a user:**

```javascript
slack.chat.postMessage({
        token: token,
        channel: '[CHANNEL NAME OR ID GOES HERE]',
        "text": "Let us know...",
        "attachments": [
            {
                "text": "What is your answer to this question?",
                "fallback": "Some other text here",
                "callback_id": "something",
                "color": "#3AA3E3",
                "attachment_type": "default",
                "actions": 
              [
                    {
                        "name": "somestuff",
                        "text": "Yes",
                        "type": "button",
                        "value": "yes"
                    },
                    {
                        "name": "somestuff",
                        "text": "No",
                        "type": "button",
                        "value": "no"
                    },              
                ]
            }
        ]
      }, (err, data) => { console.log(data); }
});
```

## Gathering string

  - Check out [The Speakeasy Society](http://speakeasysociety.com/), an immersive theater that my friend told me about!

  - I had no idea that [subversive cross-stitching](http://subversivecrossstitch.com/blog/) was a thing!
