---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for March 28th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/03/28/
cats:
  - daily
  - mob-coding
---

Just a few notes from working on my mob coding app:

**Milestones:**

  - Started this project! Created the repo, created HTML mockup for the UI, wrote the first set of project goals.

**Questions:**

  - Should the server ensure that the countdown timers are synced across all clients?

  - How should I set a timer on the server to control changing turns?

  - What exactly does the server need to keep track of?

  - How should I prevent a user from typing in the text box when it's not their turn?

  - Should I throttle the amount of data/events being sent when users are typing? How well would it perform if I sent data on every keystroke?

**Outlining events and functions that I'll need:**

  - Event: when users connect
  - Event: when a user types into the text box
  - Event: when it's time to change turns
  - Event: when users disconnect
  - Event: when a user changes their name
  - Event: clock tick, to keep clients in sync?
  - Client function: update player list, given data from server
  - Client function: send text box data to server
  - Client function: update text box, given data from server
  - Client function: update UI when turn changes, given data from server
  - Client function: update the countdown timer at a regular interval
  - Server function: track elapsed time and broadcast turn change event at the right time
  - Server function: receive and broadcast events based on data from clients
  - Server function: broadcast events when users connect or disconnect
  - Server state: keep track of list of user IDs, names, whose turn it is, who's next, and elapsed time for each turn