---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 8th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/08/
cats:
  - daily
  - cant-even-tracker
---

........ up at 7am ... ....

{% include toc.html %}

**7:49am:** Once again, I'm up early! Hurray! I just thanked my online friend on Twitter for his message, which was a reminder that every minute spent snoozing could be a minute spent helping someone. (A bit extreme, but I appreciate the sentiment.) So I asked him if I could return the favor:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Thank you <a href="https://twitter.com/artigopaulc">@artigopaulc</a>, your message via <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a> helped me wake up today! Is there anything I can do to help you too? :)</p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/894932338047504384">August 8, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I feel very confident now that I'll be able to accomplish my goal of waking up early every day this month, even on weekends. (Although I decided that sleeping in "late" until 8am on weekends is acceptable, which is what I did this past weekend.) I'm hoping that sticking to this will bolster my confidence and gradually transfer over to my larger goals, but it hasn't quite happened yet.

**Personal check-in:** All I'm hoping for today is that I won't have another panic attack. I'm looking forward to going hiking tonight with friends, but I'm also concerned about what's coming up in the near future. I'm nervous about when it's time to leave my family's house, as always, because I do tend to experience a lot of anxiety when I return to my apartment downtown afterwards. (I realized again recently that in a way, every time I leave them, I'm reliving that difficult time in my life when my mom was dying and I lived with an emotionally abusive roommate. I built up an association between returning to my apartment and being unsafe, and I built up an association between leaving my family and thinking about losing them forever.) Yeah, that's some pretty heavy stuff for 8am on a Tuesday. My point is, it's clear that my anxiety is centered around past experiences that caused panic attacks and might cause future panic attacks merely by association. From everything I've read online, it really does seem like I have [panic disorder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panic_disorder), which I couldn't help but read about for a while just now. But that's enough of that for this morning... reading that made me feel very emotional just now, especially the description of panic disorder co-morbid with depression as causing "chronic, disabling illness" which probably describes me. Identifying with that is a very depressing thought, and I feel at the same time like fighting it and giving in to it. But I want to fight it. Even if that *does* describe me, I don't need to identify with it. I've certainly done plenty of good things in spite of it. Like my friend from Twitter reminded me this morning, I can still help other people. And I can still help myself, too.

**8:18am:** Before I got sidetracked by that dark topic, I was planning to either do more math practice until breakfast with my family, or see if I can build that "I can't even" tracker real quick. (Quick question: does "I can't even" mean the same thing as "I can odd"?) Haha, OK. Sure, why not, let's do it. What would it take to build the simplest version of this?

**First implementation of "I can't even" tracker app:**

  - Create a new Firebase database

  - Create one web page that adds a node with a timestamp to a list of "I can't even"s as soon as the page is opened

  - Create another web page that does the same thing, but adds to a list of "Actually I can!"s

  - Optionally, each page could have a text box for entering related notes, which would be appended to the node that was just created

  - No authentication needed for now, as long as the app isn't shared publicly. That's secure enough.

  - Later: display a count of each list for each day.

  - Later: display a list of the most recent "I can't even"s to choose from when entering an "Actually I can!" so that they can be linked in the database

  - Create a new category in my blog for this project

**8:38am:** I spent another 10 minutes writing a short description for [the new category page on my blog for this "I can't even" tracker app](/cant-even-tracker), convincing myself that this is worthwhile and not silly. (One of the most persistent negative thoughts that I deal with is "This is a waste of time" or "I should be doing something more important", and even when I know it's an irrational thought, sometimes I still believe it.) So once more, to remind myself: this is *not* a waste of time. This is an idea I've thought about for a while and now is as good a time as any to actually build it. Plus it shouldn't take very long at all to make a quick prototype. Then I can test it out for the rest of the month and see if it yields any interesting data, or maybe the very act of tracking that data might change my behavior. Anyway, time to have some breakfast with my family.

...

**11:01am:** After having a big "I can't even" moment just this morning, I leaned in and faced the anxiety head-on this time by leaving my family's house right after breakfast and going to the gym. But I have a compromise: I can return back to my family's house for lunch if I feel I need to. Otherwise, I can just head home from here and spend the rest of the day on my own. So that's a perfect example right there of transforming an "I can't even" to an "Actually I can!" with three of my main strategies: leaning into the discomfort ("I'll leave right now instead of putting it off"), giving myself an escape route ("I can come back for lunch if I need to"), and making the challenge smaller ("If I don't feel ready to return to my apartment yet, I can at least start by going to the gym").

I had a good workout and *almost* did a real pull-up for the first time! Woohoo! That's a significant milestone for me, after all this time practicing pull-up negatives only every once in a while and not really seeing any progress (because I never practiced often enough). Maybe I'm finally starting to gain some momentum with this.

I also had a nice phone call with a friend who I recently caught up with, who's doing exactly what I've been interested in trying on my own: she's teaching programming classes and running a training program of her own, and she already has a grant to help fund the initiative! She reached out to ask for my help in finding a venue to host her next series of classes, and she asked if she could help me with anything in return, so I immediately suggested meeting for coffee or lunch sometime so I could pick her brain about what she's been up to. I want to work together somehow! I'm pretty excited about that possibility, but understandably nervous too. There's another "I can't even" right there: I feel like I'm not qualified to do this, like I wouldn't be able to hold up my side of the deal if we started any kind of partnership, like my anxiety would again get in the way and stop me from accomplishing my goals. But I know that none of that is necessarily true. I know those are irrational thoughts. They still persist, and I want to figure out why -- and how to solve this problem once and for all! 

**11:12am:** Anyway, I want to climb some rocks while I'm here and then I think I will meet my dad for lunch if the timing works out. Then I'll create that first quick prototype of the "I can't even" tracker app. I also want to make a quick to-do list for the other tasks and projects that are on my mind right now, just to get them out of my head and help me decide what to do next.

**11:31am:** I climbed a few rocks, decided to try a protein shake to bring with me on tonight's hike, and made plans to meet my dad for lunch at our favorite healthy restaurant right near the market he's already planning to stop at for groceries. But I need to leave really soon! I figured I can at least start on building my app before I need to leave.

First, I'll make the Firebase app, play with making a sample database structure to see if it looks right, and set up temporary security rules to allow write access to anyone but no read access (to keep my notes private in the meantime since there's no cost to that extra security right now).

**11:45am:** Done! Now I'll make one aonymous CodePen page and set up the app for the "I can't even" list, and then I'll fork it and make a tiny modification for the "Actually I can!" list.

**11:47am:** OK, at least I got it started. Time to drive.

...

**2:32pm:** I had a great lunch with my dad, drove back in traffic and now I'm sitting in my kitchen where I worked on Sunday, hoping the association will help keep me calm. I felt pretty anxious again upon saying goodbye and had a mini panic attack while driving home. Just as an experiment, I'm trying a micro dose of pot right now -- one eighth of one of those candies I bought in Seattle, haha. So that's about 0.125 grams of THC in there. I'm curious if it might help calm my nerves, or if I'll feel anything at all, or if I'll actually feel high. In the meantime, I want to try to focus on work until I need to leave for tonight's hike at Griffith Park. I'll start up where I left off: making this little app! I'm going to work in short sprints to help me work through this lingering anxiety and a little post-lunch sleepiness.

**Pomodoro 1, 2:42pm - 3:33pm:** I finished the first half of the app, and it's bookmarked on my phone's home screen now, ready for testing! The app is working just fine, thanks to recycling code from my previous Firebase experiments. I had to look up the [push() method](https://firebase.google.com/docs/reference/js/firebase.database.Reference#push) again to make sure I can indeed save a reference to the newly-created node. I also looked up the [set() method](https://firebase.google.com/docs/reference/js/firebase.database.Reference#set) to confirm that it does indeed overwrite any existing data, so I had to do `newNodeRef.child('new-key').set('new-value')` in this case. I also spent a good chunk of time just playing with the stylesheet because it was fun and relaxing. I got into the zone for a little while.

**3:34pm:** Time for a short break, and then I'll finish the second half of the app real quick.

**4:08pm:** I washed some dishes and listened to a podcast (the [zarf](https://zarf.co/) audio log about one woman's journey in building a tech startup on her own). How did that take so long? Maybe I am experiencing a very mild high right now... then again, it always takes me a ridiculously long time to wash dishes. I zone out and think about other things and then realized I washed the same dish three times. Anyway, I'm back now. Time to fork and make a couple tiny edits to finish the other half of this little app.

**4:18pm:** All done! Woohoo! That was the quickest prototype of something useful I think I've *ever* made. Well, it remains to be seen if it's useful. I now have two bookmarks side-by-side on my phone's home screen, which I can click any time I have a strong feeling to track. I figure I'll use it for the next week or two and then see if I should bother adding new features. I'm also very curious about just how many times I have that "I can't even" feeling over the course of a couple of weeks.

**Next feature ideas for the ["I can't even" tracker](/cant-even-tracker):**

  - Add user authentication, of course!

  - Model the form fields based on a cognitive behavior therapy worksheet

  - Display a count of each list for each day.

  - Link each "Actually I can!" node with a previous "I can't even" node.

So that's a wrap for now. I'm feeling calm again but indecisive right now. Should I wash more dishes? Jump right into one of my next big projects? Ah, but I really just want to relax and do some more Khan Academy math practice until it's time to go hiking. At the end of the day, I rarely feel like starting something big when I know I'll just have to stop and lose my momentum again. (Or maybe that's a type of procrastination related to my anxiety issues?) Eh, one small step at a time. I'll take another short break and then do some math practice. That I know I can do without triggering more anxiety.

...

**5:19pm:** Oops, I fell asleep! I guess I needed to catch up a little bit, because I feel very refreshed. And strangely... hungry again? But I ate such a big lunch! Eh whatever, I'll have that protein shake right now. It's not enough liquid to keep me hydrated on the hike anyway, so I'll bring my large water bottle instead. OK, time for some math practice to help me wake up! Then I will try to get up the courage to start on one of my next big projects, at least a tiny bit.

## Math practice notes

Today I went from being 58% to 65% finished with 7th grade math on Khan Academy. Yay!

  - Following up on yesterday's geometry practice, I also forgot the equation for finding the *circumference* of a circle and how to find out the area of a circle based on its circumference. Answer: the circumference of a circle is simply its radius times two Pi. So first find the radius, which is the circumference divided by two times Pi and then do the usual Pi times radius squared to find out the area. Easy!

  - I don't know why I didn't realize this yesterday: the area of a unit circle is Pi!

  - I also never realized this before, or I totally forgot: to get the circumference of a circle given its diameter, just multiple its diameter by Pi!

  - I had to review [this video on multiplying and dividing in scientific notation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=497oIjqRPco) and I forgot that scientific notation requires the first number to be between 1 and 10.

  - I'm OK at long division now! Just still kind of bad at finding factors of numbers.

**6:11pm:** OK, that's enough math for today I guess. I made a good chunk of progress! Any time I relearn something that I forgot, it's as if I can *feel* those connections becoming stronger in my brain. Anyway, what next? I have a few minutes before I need to drive over to Griffith Park. I guess I'll make a quick list of what's I'm thinking of...

**Ideas for next projects:**

  - Work on the curriculum for Friday afternoon's JavaScript game workshop. It could be *so* much better! (I'm scared of spending too much time on this though, because I could potentially put an *infinite* amount of time into making it better and better.)

  - Build the start of a simple RSVP app to try out at Friday night's downtown community hack night! Bare minimum: let users log in with their GitHub account (or Slack or other sign-in systems?) and enter a list of topics that they're interested in, projects that they're working on, and any questions that they have. Other users will be able to see the list, hopefully making it easier for people to strike up conversations with each other on the night of the event and follow up with people more easily aftewards!

  - Build that real-time collaborative note-taking app on top of the RSVP app prototype! The ultimate goal is to encourage every one of our meetup hosts to publish meeting notes for each of their events, written by *all* the participants. I already have a few friends in mind to share the prototype with to get their feedback, and it would be immediately useful to me too!

**6:22pm:** Well, it's time for me to leave now. But I think I've decided: I'll take a stab at that second idea when I got home tonight or first thing tomorrow morning!

...

**9:39pm:** That was an amazing hike! I should sleep well after that. I'm a bit hungry but I think I'll try not to eat. I just need to send a couple quick emails and then I'm going to either read in bed until I get sleepy or hang out with my partner-in-crime and probably watch TV until I get sleepy.


## Gathering string

  - One day I need to play this video game called ["That Dragon, Cancer"](http://www.thatdragoncancer.com/), a serious game about parents losing their child to cancer. It won a bunch of awards and sounds interesting! (Also sounds depressing, but I'm OK with that.)

  - Read [this PDF on "The Federal Resources Playbook for Registered Apprenticeship"](https://www.doleta.gov/oa/federalresources/playbook.pdf) to learn more about federal grants for educational programs.