---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 9th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/09/
cats:
  - daily
---

I missed my early morning wakeup goal and had some strong anxiety today, but at least I fought through it on my own this time. I had an onboarding call to get set up as co-director of Women Who Code LA, I did some more math practice, I set up an appointment with another therapist to get a second opinion on my anxiety issues, and then I had a good rock climbing session at night.

{% include toc.html %}

## Real-time notes

**7:37am:** I'm determined to make this the *only* day I miss my early morning wakeup goal for the rest of the month. I woke up on time, tried to go back to sleep, and decided to get up, but I'll probably go back to sleep. I'm really sleepy. I was up late last night -- personal stuff that I don't want to write about here, which makes me think that maybe I should be keeping a separate private journal again. I stopped at some point when I felt like it was encouraging me to do too much introspective writing as a form of procrastination. Still not sure if that's a good thing or not, or what's the right balance. I feel very uncertain right now about what's going to happen next in my life, and I'm scared -- mostly about this illness that I apparently have with this anxiety, whatever it is. I'm trying to remind myself to focus on one day at a time and remember about what I wanted to work on today, but I guess I'm realizing that maybe I'm just too tired right now. So I think I will try to sleep again.

...

**1:00pm:** I guess I did miss my early wakeup goal. I tried to go back to sleep and then took a couple more short naps. Just finished the onboarding call for Women Who Code -- I guess I'm officially a director for the Los Angeles chapter! Woohoo! So that's one nice thing about today so far. Right now I'm just getting another event on the calendar for that group.

**1:29pm:** Now that I'm finished with that quick task, I'll have a bite to eat and try doing some math practice on Khan Academy while I practice fighting this persistent "I can't even" feeling and accompanying anxiety that's really strong today. I guess a small win for today would simply be to *not* give in to this urge to return to my family's house and work on building up a better behavior in reaction to these emotions.

**2:28pm:** After lunch I got distracted by the internet a bit and sent some more emails, and then I just had a short conversation with my dad about a therapist that a family friend recommended. I'm both appreciative of everything my family is doing to help me and scared of what's going to happen next. But I know that I need to take action, because this isn't getting better on its own and it's been much worse recently. Anyway, back to what I was doing. I'm going to eat some vegetables and do some math practice to calm my nerves again after the burst of fear that I felt with that phone call just now. Reminding myself that it's only a feeling and right now everything is OK and I can still take a step forward here.

**2:59pm:** I made an appointment with that other therapist for a consultation and did a little math practice. Working very slowly but at least I was able to focus for a little while. I'm going to do some more practice now, giving myself permission to just do this for as long as I need to if it's helping me stay calm today. Math as medicine, how about that... Never in a million years would I have thought I'd be doing math problems voluntarily. Facing my math anxiety was very helpful in the past so it's worth revisiting.

**3:40pm:** I took a break to download some anxiety podcasts on my phone and listen to part of [this podcast](https://www.si.com/mmqb/2016/10/12/steve-young-talks) about a successful athlete who suffered from separation anxiety well into adulthood. I've thought about it a lot but haven't really had the courage (or haven't given myself permission) to seek out stories from people who have struggled with similar issues, but maybe it's time to start being more proactive in learning about other people's experiences, little by little. It might help me feel less alone in this.

**4:09pm:** Having a bite to eat now after reading a few more anxiety stories online. They didn't really help me feel any better, though. So back to some more math practice.

**5:13pm:** I did a bit more math practice and had a long conversation with my dad on the phone about what's been going on, what his friend suggested, medications that supposedly can work really well... I got a bit upset during that conversation but I'm still staying relatively calm. Not panicked, at least. So that's something. I'm also cooking some oatmeal for a small snack. I'm having glimpses of hope or inspiration related to getting myself to work on a project again, like at least preparing a tiny bit for the workshop I'm teaching on Friday, but those glimpses disappear again before I can act on them. I still feel like I'm losing touch with myself, which is why I keep returning to writing in this journal even though I know that unfortunately this has become less of a learning journal and more of an anxiety disorder journal. Oh well. If it's helping me, I'll keep doing it. And I don't want to have to hide this from other people completely. It's OK if this is out there in the open. (Besides, it's only semi-public anyway. I doubt many people will bother reading these raw notes.)

**5:31pm:** OK, I think that's finally enough math practice. Going to take a little break before I try again to get myself to work on something.

**Wrapping up:** I ended up taking a long nap until it was time to go rock climbing, so no other work got done. But at least I practiced working through anxiety; this was the first time in a long time that I was able to stay relatively calm while at home by myself all day. Hopefully that will bolster my confidence enough to do a bit more tomorrow.


## Math practice notes

As of today, I'm 75% finished with Khan Academy's 7th grade math problems. Hurray!

  - Here's something I hadn't realized: the graph of any proportional relationship always goes through the origin! I just never thought about it before, but it makes sense. A proportional relationship only includes multiplication or division, with no other terms being added or subtracted. It's the very *definition* of a ratio, and a proportion is just a set of equal ratios. (If a constant were being added to the end of the ratio, the graph of that equation wouldn't go through the origin and it also wouldn't be a proportional relationship.)

  - Just to reiterate: yes, today I also relearned the difference between a ratio and a proportion! A ratio is a relationship between two numbers (like how much of one is mapped to each unit of the other), and a proportion is a set of equal ratios.

  - Today I relearned some more geometry: supplementary angles add up to 180 degrees, complementary angles add up to 90 degrees, adjacent angles share a side (and a vertex), and vertical angles are across from each other at the intersection of two lines.


## Gathering string

  - I love this [animated CSS mail button](https://codepen.io/jakegilesphillips/pen/MveNLe)!

  - Be sure to take another look through this [list of weird and funny JavaScript examples called wtfjs](https://github.com/denysdovhan/wtfjs)

  - "A checklist of tactics for marketing your side projects: [The Side Project Marketing Checklist](https://github.com/karllhughes/side-project-marketing)

  - I'm also very curious about [this "pocket-sized implementation fo Bitcoin" written in Python](https://github.com/jamesob/tinychain) for exploring how it works. I really like this line: "Bitcoin is a way of generating pseudo-anonymous, decentralized trust at the cost of electricity."
