---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for September 5th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/09/05/
cats:
  - daily
---

First full day back after our weekend trip to Big Bear with a bunch of friends, and my first day in a while working all day at the usual coworking space. I pretty much just caught up on email and did some event planning work all afternoon. I struggled with anxiety again, though at least it wasn't nearly as strong as I thought it might be today. I felt sad for most of the evening, though, like I can feel depression creeping back up on me again.

{% include toc.html %}

## What I did today

**Morning:**

  - Woke up around 8am, snoozing after my initial alarm -- boo! At least I didn't oversleep by too much.
  - Stopped at the bank
  - Renewed one of my domain names
  - Postponed the JavaScript class back a couple weeks (sent out some emails to students and to our venue/host)
  - Followed up about picking up donated laptops tomorrow and meeting my friend for lunch
  - Worked on orchestrating the next two months of Girl Develop It classes with a few different teachers and possible venues

**Afternoon:**

  - Followed up with volunteers for our next mentorship night event
  - Followed up with a possible venue for our next DTLA hack night and our next mentorship night
  - Scheduled my next afternoon workshops for the next three Fridays
  - Brainstormed with a friend on a new programming project idea to work on together
  - Looked through the [Open Source Summit](http://events.linuxfoundation.org/events/open-source-summit-north-america/) schedule and added some events to my calendar
  - Went for a walk to local grocery stores in search of a ripe avocado (didn't find any, but the walk was nice!)
  - Sent some photos and headshots to the company I taught a workshop for, so they could publish them with an write-up in their company's internal magazine  

**Evening:**

  - Quiet night at home, stopped at the grocery store, felt really sad for a while but then felt better again


## Gathering string

  - [A collection of stuff every programmer should know](https://github.com/mr-mig/every-programmer-should-know) (looks like a nice list of topics and resources!)

  - Here's a cool tutorial on how databases work by building a SQLite clone from scratch in C: [Let's Build a Simple Database](https://cstack.github.io/db_tutorial/)

  - The [IBM Q website](http://research.ibm.com/ibm-q/) has some nice tutorials introducing quantum computing. Looks fun!
