---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 5th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/05/
cats:
  - daily
  - social-alarm-clock
---

After waking up at 8am, I spent most of the day hanging out at a coworking space, did a little work on my social alarm clock app, and then attended a piano recital with a friend and caught up over drinks.

{% include toc.html %}

**12:35pm:** I'm starting slow today, really moving through this day one moment at a time, still with lots of inner doubt but so far staying calm and carrying on. I woke up at 8am today and went for a walk, and now I'm with my partner-in-crime working at a different coworking space that's completely empty. It's beautiful, actually, having the entire floor of this office to ourselves. And it's *so* quiet. We have a beautiful view of the city from up here, sitting at a desk facing these floor-to-ceiling windows. 

**Personal check-in:** I invested a solid 45 minutes in filling out that CBT homework sheet my therapist gave me last time I was there, writing down my thoughts and analyzing them in detail to identify cognitive distortions and counter each and every one of them. I felt anxious while doing it, aware of the fact that it was already late in the morning and that wasn't how I planned to spend so much of my time, and the whole exercise felt silly and reminded me of my broken-ness. But if it helps stave off another panic attack, it's worthwhile. Besides, it's Saturday. And if I get *any* work done at all today, that's still better than many other days I've had in the past. I updated my notes from yesterday and published them, including more ideas related to the workshop I taught. Then I did some math practice on Khan Academy, and I'm 50% finished with 7th grade math, yay! Just some review of basic probability and algebra problems. Easy stuff. It was a good little warmup to practice staying focused. But I still feel like my neurons are firing through molasses right now.

**12:50pm:** I got stuck in some thought loops again. Returning to focus now. I wanted to finish up where I left off yesterday with my social alarm clock app. Speaking of which, I had a nice wakeup message this morning! I shared my thanks on Twitter again:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Thank you <a href="https://twitter.com/Ramtin_N">@Ramtin_N</a> that lovely wakeup message :) The early morning air was so fresh and cool!<br> (Social alarm app: <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a>)</p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/893918376497524736">August 5, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

So, what's next with finishing up that app... Reviewing [my notes from yesterday]({% post_url 2017-08-04-notes %}): decrement the message count, update the previously read message timestamp, and update the next wakeup timestamp. So I'll start by decrementing the message count, which means first I'll need to look up how to update a node in the database. I need to take a quick bathroom break first, stretch my legs, and then I'll finally finish up this app.

**1:14pm:** Time to try again to focus. Using the [Firebase `set()` method](https://firebase.google.com/docs/reference/js/firebase.database.Reference#set) is super simple, so I have everything I need to make this work.

**1:23pm:** Messy code, but it should work. Time to test it... Hurray, it works! Onto the next step: update the previously-read message timestamp. So now when I access the message, I need to just save its timestamp and throw it into that node in the database.

**1:51pm:** Not as easy as I hoped, which is to be expected! Bleh, asynchronous code. Now I'm really feeling the pain of not using promises or async functions here. So the message needs to be retrieved (and displayed) first, and *then* those other things can be updated. So if I just reorder the code a bit, it should work. I hope.

**1:59pm:** Yay, it works now! OK, next I'll update the wakeup timestamp for the current day. I totally forgot about another thing to update: the *next* wakeup goal! I think I got those two things mixed up the other day when I was outlining the application logic. Oops. So yeah, I have *two* more things to update. One at a time...

**2:11pm:** Got that first part working, yay! Now for the last piece: retrieving the next day's wakeup goal timestamp and using that to automatically update the next wakeup goal, so that way I finally won't need to set it manually every single night! This part should be easy. Then I'll have a bite to eat, and then it'll be time to meet my friend for a drink across the street before we go to that piano recital.

**Wrapping up:** The piano recital was great, but what I enjoyed most was catching up with my friend, just the two of us! We had a great meal together and a couple of drinks too. I loved walking around the city at sunset, up and down Grand Avenue following a nice cool breeze. I had a small panic attack later in the evening but then I felt completely fine again. I helped out my partner-in-crime with some work, then walked home together around 10pm and went to bed fairly early.
