---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 7th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/07/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today I spent the early morning doing some math practice, answering emails and planning events, and then I spent the rest of the day with my family, doing a little work here and there in between our usual routine.

{% include toc.html %}

**7:31am:** Starting the second week of my streak of early mornings! Today I *finally* got to read and reply to a wakeup message from [my social alarm clock app prototype](/social-alarm-clock) first thing in the morning, while I was still lying in bed and not quite awake yet and strongly considering snoozing for another hour.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Haha <a href="https://twitter.com/thegametwok">@thegametwok</a> thanks for the msg on <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a>, it made me choose not to snooze just now. The robots must not win!! ;)</p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/894562013640237056">August 7, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

This app *really* works! And it's *so* easy to keep it going and to ask others to help me out -- just takes 10 seconds to write me a short message. I'm sure its motivational power will start to wear off after another week or two, and then I'll just have to switch things up again. I can still try those early morning Google hangouts again. Or early morning live coding sessions. Or implementing the actual wakeup voice message into my app. So many ideas!

As for right now, I'm going to do some Khan Academy math practice to help wake me up.

**8:33am:** Distracted for a while and then did a little organizing too. I also plan to *finally* clean a few dishes today. And then I think I'll spend the day at my family's house. (I guess I'm still in the mindset of just doing anything that makes me feel better, rather than focusing on achieving any goals. I'm fighting the impulse to beat myself up over this feeling.) So back to a little math review. That plus this cup of green tea might finally wake me up.

**9:57am:** I did some more math practice, but in between I also set up another Friday midday programming workshop! I'm much more inclined to iterate on these beginner workshops during the day. This time I'm revisiting that Snake game, but I want to experiment with collaborative coding in Glitch and see what I can do about resources that supplement the curriculum... like maybe providing several small code examples to copy from, a cheatsheet to print out for people to have handy alongside their laptops, and other ideas that I've thought about a lot but have yet to act on. Anyway, back to math for a little while!

## Math practice notes

Today I went from 52% to 58% finished with 7th grade math on Khan Academy, reviewing a bit of algebra, mental arithmetic, and geometry! I also made a new connection between algebraic expressions and what I've already been teaching in my programming workshops -- that's what I'm most excited about from today's practice sesion, because it means I might be able to come up with a better way to teach this stuff and help the students who get stuck!

  - I still occassionally miss things when identifying greatest common factors or least common multiples or whatever, which indicates to me that I just need to work on memorizing my multiplication tables better or just achieving faster recall or pattern-reecognition there.

  - I had to review the meaning of the term *proportional*! A sequence of value pairs are proportional if they all have the same ratio. I'm pretty sure that also means the function must be linear, but I'm not entirely sure of that, haha.

  - I forgot the formula for finding the [area of a circle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Area_of_a_circle), so I had to look it up: it's Pi times the radius squared. And that reminds me that I have no idea *why* that's the formula and I never *really* learned what Pi is all about! Another note under "gathering string" to look into later.

  - Some of these basic algebra problems remind me of similar patterns I see in programming, especially with the concept of "equivalent expressions"! When teaching JavaScript basics, I checked if the students could rewrite expressions in several different ways and focused on encouraging them to use that technique to "factor" complex structures into simpler ones that fit the patterns they had already worked with before. At the time, I never related it to algebra, but that's *exactly* what it is! And for the students who struggled with restructuring expressions or recognizing those patterns, maybe all they needed was an algebra refresher!

**10:48am:** Time to do some dishes, and then I'll probably drive over to my family's house soon.

...

**12:00pm:** I am at my family's house now, but I never got to do the dishes because they had *just* turned off the water to repair a pipe! Haha, perfect timing. Anyway, I just heard back about a couple of things for upcoming events, so I'm going to reply now before I jump into any other work. While I'm at it, I'll probably also take care of some other admin work.

**1:27pm:** I got caught up in editing photos from last Friday's workshop, doing some more event promotion, and reading random things on the internet and talking to people both online and here in person. Time to finally eat some lunch! Then I might just spend time with family the rest of the afternoon.

...

**5:43pm:** Time flies! I helped out my partner-in-crime with some more reading/editing, had a nice little lunch, played a good game of cards with my dad and stepmom, did some laundry, read an article about the founders of Stripe, and answered some more email. I also read a bit about [calculating hourly rates for freelance projects](http://blog.teamtreehouse.com/calculate-hourly-freelance-rates-web-design-development-work) since I might be discussing that with my friend for a possible new web design gig. I've been feeling a spike of anxiety ever since I found out that there's a chance we may actually take on that project, wondering if I'm ready for it or if my anxiety might prevent me from being able to complete the project. I figured if I could work on it in collaboration with my friend, the extra support might bolster my confidence enough to face the challenge. But of course there are other challenges when going into business with a friend, and that worries me too! Sigh. Maybe I'll just do some more math practice right now to calm my nerves until it's time for dinner.

**Wrapping up:** I spent the rest of the night relaxing. We had a nice dinner at home, my dad and I took the dogs to the nearby dog park, I talked to him about how I've been feeling lately and the strangeness of my sudden calmness on Sunday and we caught up on day-to-day stuff, and then we all watched TV. I fell asleep on the couch around 10pm until it was time for everyone to go to sleep. It was so nice to feel safe and comfortable in that normal routine. I definitely wish I could spend every night with my family like this, but then I also really look forward to hiking with friends tomorrow night.

## Gathering string

  - Math question to confirm for myself: is my assumption correct that only *linear* functions produce proportional input/output pairs, and that the proportion is equivalent to the slope of the line when the function is drawn as a graph?

  - Math topic to learn about sometime: what Pi is all about, and how can I derive all formulas related to circles from first principles?

  - I discovered another light-weight CMS system: [ComponentIO](https://component.io)! It has a free tier to experiment with. I wonder how it works! Something to look into later for that GitHub CMS idea.

  - Here's a cool website I never heard of before: [Indie Hackers](https://www.indiehackers.com/), all about starting and running software startups.

  - To read: [Increment](https://increment.com/), an online magazine from Stripe that's all about software engineering, focused on how different companies have solved interesting technological challenges.

  - Found a new book to add to my reading list: [*The Dream Machine: J.C.R. Licklider and the Revolution That Made Computing Personal*](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/722412.The_Dream_Machine)

  - Another idea for that "I can't even" tracker app idea: the first version could even just be two CodePen pages linked to a Firebase database, which I can create bookmarks for on my phone, so that way as soon as I open those web pages, an entry would automatically be saved to the database with the timestamp. One page would be to track those "I can't even" feelings, optionally with a text box (or several) describing how I feel, and the other page would be to track how many times I can turn it into an "Actually, I can!" feeling.
