---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 4th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/04/
cats:
  - daily
  - social-alarm-clock
---

Today I woke up at 6am, went hiking with two friends, taught a programming workshop for the first time in a while (first time in the afternoon, too!), had lunch with another friend, and did some coworking and brainstorming with friends at the HQ for open source Friday!

{% include toc.html %}

**9:06am:** At my friend's house now (the open source Friday crew!), eating Nutella on fresh, delicious bread after a very early morning hike at Franklin Canyon. I got a bunch of pictures which I hope to share later! But first, I need to fix my social alarm clock app. I found a bug! So I couldn't read my message early this morning when I woke up at 6am. I think I just need to make sure none of the fields are null or undefined before I display them.

**9:21am:** Yay, that fixed it! Now to thank my friend for leaving me a message.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Thanks <a href="https://twitter.com/JamesGable">@JamesGable</a> for the wakeup message! Seems like it needs a funny meme pic :D<br> Day 4 using my social alarm app: <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a></p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/893509216513662977">August 4, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

**9:31am:** OK, where did I leave off [yesterday]({% post_url 2017-08-03-notes %})... oh right, implementing the new application logic! I'll work on this part first: "I can only read a message if today's wakeup goal node's wakeup timestamp isn't already set." Clunky wording, but I know what it means, haha. I guess this needs to be a Firebase security rule? Or I guess I could use the front-end code for this too. Yeah, I'm not going to go *that* out of my way to cheat. I'll try that first. Plus I'd have to do some annoying timestamp math again to use the security rules to do it.

So what needs to happen here.... First, retrieve the data for the current day's wakeup goal. Then check if the wakeup timestamp is -1. If it is, allow the rest of the logic to run; otherwise, return out of that function and display some message in the UI.

**9:46am:** I had to write a function to get and format the current date and also update the security rules for accessing that part of the database. 

**9:56am:** Done! It works! Now I just need to decrement the message count, update the previously read message timestamp, and update the next wakeup timestamp.

**10:01am:** Well, I got it started. But it's time to get ready to return downtown now!


## Notes from today's workshop

First of all, it went pretty well! I'm suprised that a good number of people want to attend a workshop in the middle of the day on a week day. (But I guess there are lots people in our community with flexible schedules.) I've had enough practice teaching this stuff now that I can improvise just fine, hit all the major topics without rambling too much, and walk through creating a tiny web app from scratch in 30 minutes. I felt very present while I was presenting -- is that why we call it "presenting"?

**Ideas for next time:**

  - Show an example of what a website looks like with only HTML (and default styles), then with CSS, and then with JavaScript.

  - Make a graphic or a slide or better yet, an interactive tool that visualizes that common metaphor of HTML as the skeleton, CSS as the skin, and JavaScript as the brain.

  - Try to spend no more than three minutes on examples of frameworks. Show just enough to get the point across that frameworks and libraries are just collections of code that other people wrote to solve a particular problem and help other developers save time.

  - Make a graphic or a tool that visualizes the hierarchy of DOM objects in my starter examples like `document.body.style.background` and really drive home the point that there is a hierarchy, we move from general to specific (which is what the dots mean), and objects are just buckets that can contain stuff including other objects.

  - Compile a list of links to common reference pages, like the list of CSS property names or the list of JavaScript events.

  - Always include an example that illustrates what a function is and the difference between defining a function and calling it. (Also mention the synonyms used there, like "execute", "run", "call", etc.)

  - Avoid discussing the difference between the double and triple equal signs! But do mention data types. Maybe just do that quick demo by opening say an image file with a text editor, with an image program, and with an audio program to point out that the same data can be interpreted different ways.

  - Try using the choose-your-own-adventure book metaphor to explain the concept of conditions and branching logic -- it's also a perfect analogy for the go-to statement and even introducing the concept of loops! (Would be funny to make a choose-your-own-adventure book that was an infinite loop.)

  - I should write down a list of all key takeaways I'm aiming for in each workshop: what concepts I think the students should definitely remember afterwards, but also what concepts I want to briefly introduce, and what concepts I want to leave out entirely.

  - Idea for introductions: start with my own childood story about the magic of creating my first website (and show my old fuzzles website!), and say that it's an honor get to share that magic with everyone in the group. Point out that programming is the most *empowering* hobby I've ever learned.

After teaching for an hour and then meeting another friend for lunch, I spent the rest of the afternoon coworking with friends at the HQ again. We had a good brainstorming session for our idea of an open-source framework or toolkit for creating a minimal CMS based on GitHub and Jekyll. We had lots of interesting ideas, like how we might be able to use a GitHub App with a configuration file to set up more granular permissions for the users of a website. Then we jmuped right into doing some pair programming on a technical topic that was of interest to both of us: how to upload a file!


## Notes on the HTML5 file API

**Questions:**

  - Is it possible to upload files and send them directly to the GitHub API without a server?

  - What's a blob, and what's a binary string, and what's the difference?

  - What's this MIME type "x-user-defined-binary" all about?

  - How do you handle reading files with NodeJS, I wonder?

  - What is multipart form data? When uploading an image to a server, does it get sent in multiple chunks then? (I assume so!)

Our go-to resource: [MDN's article on "Using files from web applications"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Using_files_from_web_applications). Here's a working CodePen that lets you select an image and see a thumbnail of that image, based on some of MDN's example code: https://codepen.io/LearnTeachCode/pen/ayBXVL

**Wrapping up:** We never did get the file upload working, but we did have a good conversation with the other people there that day, helping someone with some user experience design work and having a drink together at the end of the day while talking about music and food and weekend plans and so on. Overall, it was an amazing day! The only downside was that at night I had another panic attack. But then I was OK again, as always, and I just need to remember that so I can hopefully have another good day tomorrow.


## Gathering string

  - I discovered [Open Source Friday](https://opensourcefriday.com/) is a real thing -- and a big thing!

  - [XML User Interface Language (XUL)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XUL) is Mozilla's XML-based language for building user interfaces of applications like Firefox.

  - Now I want to learn more about how file uploads work and about multipart forms!
