---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 21st, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/21/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today I found out that I'm prediabetic. Not cool! Other than that, it was just an off day, a "nothing day", because my anxiety was at that overwhelming level where I needed to retreat to my comfort zone. Oh well. I'm thankful that at least I could spend time with my family even if I couldn't get myself to do anything else.

{% include toc.html %}


## What I did today

  - I saw the solar eclipse, standing on my balcony and watching the shadow of a piece of paper with a tiny hole poked through it. Very cool! Maybe for the next one I'll actually plan a trip to see the totality.

  - I spent the day at my family's house, after struggling with anxiety the whole morning and giving up on trying to fight it. I felt guilty about that, giving up on my goals for a while in favor of finding a sense of safety and comfort. I never know what the right thing to do is in that scenario, because sometimes toughing it out does help, but other times it seems to backfire.

  - I found out that I'm technically prediabetic, after reviewing my recent blood test results with my dad. Yikes! That's a big wakeup call; no matter how much I exercise and how healthy my diet is most of the time, I probably can't get away with binge-eating desserts as often as I tend to do!

  - After much procrastinating, I finally filled out the giant form about my medical history and personality type, in preparation for this consultation with a psychiatrist that a family friend referred me to. Hoping I'll get some helpful answers.  


## Gathering string

  - Projects to do with family: build a Raspberry Pi or Arduino project with my dad sometime! Also: try making clam chowder, especially if there's a recipe that doesn't use cream.

  - Check out [Sunday Assembly](http://www.sundayassemblyla.org/), a community in LA that sounds like it's trying to be a non-religious church sort of experience, featuring talks by various speakers, music, and other fun stuff!
