---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for September 7th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/09/07/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today I was feeling really awesome but also a bit scatter-brained and antsy. But I got more done today than I have in a while, making good progress on planning my next classes and learning more about React!

{% include toc.html %}


## What I did today

**Morning:**

  - Up on time, joined my friend Rouzbeh for a virtual pair programming and study session reviewing ["The Complete Intro to React"](https://btholt.github.io/complete-intro-to-react/) and discussing how to approach our Netflix-for-tech-talks project, which he made [a repo for here](https://github.com/rouzbeh84/techtalks).

  - Walked over to my usual coworking space, hoping to finally break that anxiety association

  - Told a good friend about what's been going on with me lately and why I haven't been at the coworking space much. I just blurted it out, somewhat impulsively!

  - After feeling super antsy and unable to focus, I moved to my favorite coffee shop and bought some comfort food.

  - Sent sponsorship details to one venue that may host our next DTLA hack night, and possibly some other events later

  - Reached out to a few venues about possibly hosting our upcoming Girl Develop It classes

  - Updated the class planning and resource spreadsheets for Girl Develop It to prepare for our next leadership meeting


**Afternoon:**

  - Reviewed curriculum from my past classes

  - Outlined potential homework assignments for this upcoming class

  - Replied to everyone who signed up for this upcoming class and followed up about possible alternate days and times for future classes

  - Stopped at another cafe to indulge in a sugar-free decaf cappuccino. It was delicious, actually! I didn't miss the lack of sugar or caffeine. Maybe I could get used to this after all.

  - Walked home and brainstormed a ton of ideas for curriculum and other projects, feeling super creative. Tried to take a nap but couldn't, so I cooked a small lunch.

  - Received payment from a few students already. That's a good sign that this class is touching on the right topics!

**Evening:**

  - Decided not to go hiking and try to have a calm, quiet evening to myself instead. So I walked back to the coworking space to try to do some work. (It was too hot at home.)

  - Tried listening to soundscapes for the first time in a long time. The feeling of being enveloped in the richness of those sounds was definitely calming -- that and drinking some ginger tea. 

  - Sent out individual reminder messages to confirm with everyone who RSVPed to tomorrow's workshop, now that our conference room is confirmed

  - Started adding students to our private chat group for my upcoming JavaScript intro class

  - Reviewed more of that React tutorial that my friend sent me and got to try out React Router for the first time! It was easier than I thought.

  - Went to the grocery store, showered, read in bed, had some quality time with my partner-in-crime, and eventually went to sleep (but I stayed up too late!)


## Notes on React

Early this morning I got started on ["The Complete Intro to React"](https://btholt.github.io/complete-intro-to-react/) with my friend Rouzbeh, and the creator already [replied to us on Twitter](https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/905805684758913025):

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Good luck! Let me know if I can help!</p>&mdash; Brian Holt (@holtbt) <a href="https://twitter.com/holtbt/status/905808516719329280">September 7, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Maybe I'll take him up on his offer and ask him a question later. Anyway, here are some quick notes from this morning:

  - Stuff used by [this tutorial](https://btholt.github.io/complete-intro-to-react/): Node.js, Express, Redux, Webpack, Jest, Enzyme, Yarn, Prettier, ESLint, and React-Router

  - The course has all the source code in [this repo on GitHub](https://github.com/btholt/complete-intro-to-react)

  - He recommends using [nvm](https://github.com/creationix/nvm) and downloading Node straight from the official website, instead of using Homebrew

  - I installed [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/en/), since everyone seems to agree it's better than npm! (Funny that I'm using npm to install yarn, though!)

  - Questions I have about yarn: what does it mean to say it's "deterministic"? How/why is its caching so much better? What does it mean to lock down dependencies? What's the npm shrinkwrap command?

  - Global packages installed with yarn for this tutorial: jest@v19.0.2, nodemon, webpack@v2.2.1, prettier@v0.22.0, eslint@v3.18.0

Resuming in the evening, here are some more notes:

  - A "stateless functional component" is a simple way of creating React components as outputs of a function

  - Instances of components are created with the React.createElement method

  - Props are variable passed from parent components down to their children

  - Here's a funny new term I just discovered in the paragraph about Babel: "Tree shaking (also known as live code inclusion, as opposed to dead code elimination) is where you start with the entry point to your program (usually an index.js) and begin working outwards, only including the parts of code your code uses."

  - It's cool using Webpack with that JS linter and a local dev server and Babel and everything, but I still don't feel like I know what I'm doing, haha

  - This is my first stab at using React Router! My understanding so far is that it makes it easier to handle multiple pages in a single-page app.

  - The HashRouter uses the # at the end of the URL to handle page navigation, while the BrowserRouter supports nicer URLs (I imagine it uses the HTML5 History API?)

  - There's a Route component that takes a path attribute and, if the user is on that path, it renders the component passed through in the component attribute. (It supports exact or fuzzy matching on the paths, too.)

## Gathering string

  - [A collection of little UI details](https://twitter.com/i/moments/880688233641848832) that make a big difference.

  - [Heroicons](http://www.heroicons.com/), a set of CSS-customizable SVG icons being sold as a design pack. Nicely done!

  - [This quick speech synthesis experiment](https://surf-squash.glitch.me/#hello) by [Ricardo Cabello](https://twitter.com/mrdoob)

  - The [Google Developers Documentation Style Guide](https://developers.google.com/style/) is now open for the public!
