---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 6th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/06/
cats:
  - daily
  - social-alarm-clock
---

On this nice lazy Sunday, I spent the first half of the day doing a little studying at home and the second half of the day out with friends for rock climbing, playing games, swimming and watching "Game of Thrones" together.

{% include toc.html %}

## Real-time notes

**10:29am:** I'm having a nice lazy Sunday morning, and the best part is that for the first time in a while, I didn't feel the slightest bit anxious when I woke up today. (I also woke up on time again, shortly before my 8am alarm, no snoozing!) I feel it just a little bit now, but today is looking like it'll be a perfect Sunday funday -- rock climbing with friends, then BBQ and board games and watching "Game of Thrones" and "Rick and Morty" together! And today I finally feel comfortable with the idea of being home by myself and just doing a little work. (Although I do also like the idea of visiting my family for lunch and then driving back.) Anyway, first I think I'll make some tea, do some stretches, and practice some math on Khan Academy again. Then I'll finish up my social alarm clock app. Oh first, before I forget, I should read today's message and thank whoever sent it to me!

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Thx <a href="https://twitter.com/GaePhuoc">@GaePhuoc</a> for your message on <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a>! You&#39;re right: chasing dreams for *real* is better than dreaming in your sleep :)</p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/894254976121229312">August 6, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

**11:29am:** Today I (re)learned about the [triangle inequality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triangle_inequality) theorem and watched [this Khan Academy video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KlKYvbigBqs) all about it. The phrase "degenerate triangle" makes me giggle! I'm really surprised that I either *never* learned this in school or I *so thoroughly* forgot about it. Either way, I'm glad I know about this now! It's perfectly intuitive, and yet I never thought about it before.

I also learned today that I forgot *everything* about probabilities and I'm really terrible at these very basic problems! For example: "If you roll two fair six-sided dice, what is the probability that at least one die shows a 3?" I got this *completely* wrong, instead solving for two *consecutive* dice rolls. But they're being rolled together, so there are 36 possible outcomes -- you *multiply* the number of outcomes for each of the two dice, so that's six times six. The hint from Khan Academy shows a table of all outcomes, with the desired outcomes highlighted and counted up: 11 out of 36 is the answer. But shouldn't there be a better way to answer this, without counting? That's going to drive me crazy! Oh, here's one way to look at it: for each of the two dice, one out of every six possible outcomes is a desired outcome, so that's six plus six -- but one of those outcomes overlaps between the two, so we subtract one from that. Or something like that. Ugh, I don't know! I want to see a formula for this, haha.

**12:28pm:** Having a small lunch and looking at my code for the social alarm app. It works great! I think I'm done with it for a while. But there's just one more thing I think I'd like to add: instead of entering a timestamp for each day's wakeup goal, I should be able to just enter a human-readable time! Then when my app updates the next day's wakeup goal, it can generate a timestamp given the date and the time string. That should be easy, right? Let's see here... Looking at the documentation for the [JavaScript Date object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date).

**12:53pm:** Yay, it works perfectly now! I'm all set to wake up to a message from a friend tomorrow at 7am. I figure I'm done with my social alarm for the rest of the month, and maybe now I'll just spend one afternoon about once every month or so adding little improvements. But all I really wanted for now was a bare-minimum working prototype to test out this new habit in my day-to-day life and add a extra tiny boost of optimism, gratitude, and kindness to my morning routine. Mission accomplished!

**1:43pm:** I was taking care of some random emails, surfing the web, and just enjoying this quiet time to myself. Now, back to some unfinished business: the other day while pair programming with my friend, we were *completely* stumped on how to send a file to a server! But right before we called it a day, we realized that it probably has something to do with *multipart form data*. I found [this StackOverflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4526273/what-does-enctype-multipart-form-data-mean/4526286#4526286) after a brief search on the topic. So we were using the wrong MIME type! I'm going to work on our code again for a bit and see if I can get it to work with this now.

**1:54pm:** I have a lead from [this other StackOverflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20506987): set the [Content-Length header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Length)! How would I get the size of the uploaded file? I think that's part of the [File API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Using_files_from_web_applications)... Yeah, each file has a size property. Perfect!

**2:07pm:** Got an interesting error: "Refused to set unsafe header "Content-Length." Apparently I'm not allowed to set that header with an AJAX request. Good to know! Hmm, but even with the proper MIME type, it isn't working. Still stuck. A couple pages to look into later: [the FormData object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData/Using_FormData_Objects) and [this section on "Submitting forms and uploading files"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XMLHttpRequest/Using_XMLHttpRequest#Submitting_forms_and_uploading_files) and of course [our sample app on Glitch to test this all out](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/charm-jump). Time to go climbing and hang out with friends for the rest of the day!

## Gathering string

  - Now I'm curious about [Wikipedia's list of triangle inequalities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_triangle_inequalities)

  - Learn more about the FormData object and more resources and explainers on uploading files from web forms and handling multipart form data on servers!
