---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 23rd, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/23/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today was an eventful day with my psychiatrist appointment, and that exhausted me more than I realized. Playing board games with friends in the evening was nice though.

{% include toc.html %}

## What I did today

  - I fixed up my [social alarm clock app](/social-alarm-clock) a bit more again and [thanked my friend on Twitter for today's wakeup message](https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/900388088639217664) about an army of singing zucchinis. That totally brightened my morning!

  - More event planning stuff: confirmed with teacher and venue for an upcoming Girl Develop It class, coordinated with more volunteers for this Friday's mentorship night and next Tuesday's tech talk event, answered messages from a few different friends.

  - I had a two-hour consultation with that new psychiatrist and got confirmation that I most likely do have both a chronic anxiety disorder (panic disorder describes it well) *and* bipolar type 2 or cyclothemia. I started taking a folate supplement and got a prescription (again) for lamotrigine, an anti-convulsant that's used to treat mood disorders. I guess this was the best possible outcome: a second opinion that meshes well with the first, so that I have more confidence in the suggested treatment. Time to finally try meds again -- and who knows, maybe this time it will actually help since apparently my previous diagnoses of depression was probably incorrect, and I actually *shouldn't* be on antidepressants. I am still struggling a bit with how this diagnosis fits into my sense of identity. On the bright side, this doctor pointed out that many of my hypomanic and anxiety-related symptoms are also very common traits for successful, entrepreneurial people. Silver lining, haha. I wonder if there are many books out there for bipolar entrepreneurs.

  - Game night with friends was nice, even though I wasn't completely present.


## Gathering string

  - This [article about offline-only](https://chris.bolin.co/offline/) can only be read offline -- what a cool experiment!

  - Remember to think about talks for the next [SoCal Code Camp](https://www.socalcodecamp.com/) coming up in December! I offered to volunteer as a track chair or whatever it's called, to help recruit more speakers around a certain topic.
