---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for September 8th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/09/08/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today was another awesome open source Friday! No early morning hike this time, but I taught another short afternoon workshop, had lunch with a friend I hadn't seen in forever, made some progress on that GitHub CMS project with my friend, went rock climbing and had a night out with a bunch of friends.

{% include toc.html %}

## What I did today

**Morning:**

  - Woke up super early (6:30am, before my alarm, even though I didn't fall asleep until about 1am!), browsed the web on my phone, walked to my usual coworking space, talked to my friend on the phone to coordinate our next React study session

  - Did a little research into why my GitHub site (using Jekyll) is failing to build, but no luck yet

  - Fixed up a couple of my old notes blog posts that I never finished

  - Did some Khan Academy math practice

  - Tried out the new Glitch feature for making just a front-end website and set it up to use for today's workshop!

  - Updated the signup form for my class to double as an interest form for future classes, to find out which days and times and locations work best for everyone

  - Updated the next two Friday afternoon workshops to be a two-part class, with a short application form to fill out to manage RSVPs better

**Afternoon:**

  - Taught another afternoon workshop which went pretty well again -- got some good feedback!

  - Treated my friend to lunch (steak and salad, yum!) since he drove all the way from Orange County just to hang out. Had a good conversation. I even told him a bit about my recent bipolar disorder diagnosis, and since I was very nonchalant about it, he also treated it like no big deal. So that was cool.

  - Went to our friend's home/coworking space for another open source Friday and fixed that bug from where we left off last week with our GitHub CMS project!   

**Evening:**

  - Sat and talked on the roof with our friends again, watching the sun set behind the skyline. So beautiful!

  - Got stuck in a parking garage with my friend because their instructions weren't clear at all as to how to pay and exit the building, haha. The security guard let us out eventually.

  - Went rock climbing with a bunch of friends -- first time since climbing real rocks in Big Bear on the weekend! (I can't believe that was just last weekend. It feels like that was ages ago!)

  - Spent more time hanging out with friends, going out for a slice of pie (I had only a tiny taste), and then to a bar.

  - Went home around 11:30pm, ate some oatmeal with peanut butter, and went to sleep.


## Math practice notes

I haven't done any math practice in a while! So today I just did a little bit, going from being 16% done to now 18% done with Khan Academy's 8th grade math curriculum.

  - I reviewed some basic absolute value problems, a couple of which were actually a little tricky when combined with inequalities!

  - At least I still remember how to do long division, yay! I can still convert fractions into repeating decimals just fine.

  - I'm still comfortable with basic geometry involving supplemental and complementary angles, yay!


## Notes on GitHub API for our GitHub CMS

So last Friday's bug resulted in an error message from GitHub's API that wasn't very helpful. I tried to work it out on paper, since I wasn't sure if my assumptions about Git were true -- for example, whether every file or blob has a SHA in addition to every commit. (Answer: they do indeed each have their own SHA!) We were stuck for a while, but after searching for the error message, we found [this thread discussing the exact same issue we ran into](https://github.com/octokit/octokit.rb/issues/772).

[This comment in particular](https://github.com/octokit/octokit.rb/issues/772#issuecomment-228927880) was very helpful, written by a guy who says he worked on GitHub's API himself a while back. He said there's an important reason you need to [access the entire contents of a file](https://developer.github.com/v3/repos/contents/#get-contents) in order to get its SHA (instead of being able to conveniently provide the file path and receive its SHA): to ensure you don't overwrite a file accidentally, you need to verify that you know what the file contains.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-cards="hidden" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Yesterday&#39;s <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/TIL?src=hash">#TIL</a>: To update a file w/ the <a href="https://twitter.com/github">@GitHub</a> API, you first need to get the SHA via the Contents API. Why? See: <a href="https://t.co/QeZwm5U5eZ">https://t.co/QeZwm5U5eZ</a></p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/906603253843902464">September 9, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

So that sort of makes sense. He pointed out that if you have the file contents already, you can also just compute the SHA yourself.


## Workshop notes

  - Today we used Glitch instead of CodePen, and I noticed that we had *way* less problems with typos or confusion about how to use the app. The cleaner interface must help a lot. Since you can only view one file at a time, it was easier for people to focus on just the JavaScript -- it's also much easier on small laptop screens. I also liked that the HTML shows *all* of the HTML, not just the contents of the body element like CodePen, so I could point out the script tag that links the JavaScript file to the HTML file. Oh, and apparently Glitch works pretty well on a tablet, too!

  - Somebody pointed out something new this time: hitting the Enter key doesn't work to submit the form input! Maybe that's a good point to bring up next time.

  - Following last time's success, I stuck with this order again: introduce myself and ask everyone to do the same, show a few slides on general background stuff, have everyone try out the demo app, draw the flowchart on the whiteboard as a group exercise, ask people to identify next steps and things we need to learn, then introduce everyone to the browser console and "hacking" websites to change HTML and CSS, identify which steps of the flowchart can now be coded, introduce variables and accessing DOM elements, write the logic, introduce defining custom functions, introduce event listeners, test the app, have a discussion about debugging, fix the bug, and wrap up by celebrating our success, answering last questions, and offering suggestions for next steps!

  - This time I did spend too much time on the background stuff and talking about HTML/CSS, and then more time than usual on the flowchart process, so the part where we actually wrote code was definitely rushed and we went a bit overtime when discussing the debugging process. But nobody complained and nobody left early this time.

  - Interestingly, I put out the tip jar before class ended again this time, but we didn't get that many donations, just a few bucks. Maybe just because we had less new people and more returning students? Maybe it's just pure randomness?

  - Next time, I should try putting the tip jar out *before* people arrive and mention it briefly at the beginning and at the end. Or maybe I should put a stool or podium or something right near the door with the tip jar and sign-in sheet.

  - I totally forgot to do the sign-in sheet this time, oops! Oh well.

  - I should probably have a pre-class and post-class checklist for all these little logistical things.


## Gathering string

Just one quick note: today I discovered the `defer` attribute for the HTML `script` tag! To read: ["Deep dive into the murky waters of script loading"](https://www.html5rocks.com/en/tutorials/speed/script-loading/)
