---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 22nd, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/22/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today I felt like myself again, and I taught my first corporate training type workshop, which went really well! I did some studying, caught up on admin stuff, and visited a beautiful coworking space to hang out with a friend.

{% include toc.html %}


## What I did today

  - I had a nice breakfast at my family's house, helped my dad give the dogs a little hair cut, and showed him that proof of why 0.999... must be equal to 1.

  - I did some more math practice on Khan Academy, practicing converting repeating decimals into fractions and reviewing factor trees to identify cube roots.

  - I reviewed a NodeJS tutorial and learned more about event emitters, streams, and modules.

  - In the afternoon, I visited a new coworking space where my friend works in El Segundo. What a beautiful space!

  - Then I taught an intro to programming class at a marketing agency in El Segundo -- my first time teaching at a company! It went amazingly well, and it sounds like they want to hire me to do a whole series of workshops!

  - I took care of some event organizing stuff: had a phone meeting for Girl Develop It classes, sent out emails to help the City of Santa Monica promote their next [Hack the Beach](http://www.hackthebeach.com/) event, reached out to volunteers for next week's Women Who Code tech talk event, updated the parking details on the event pages for that meetup, set up next Girl Develop It classes and coordinated with teachers and venues.

  - I went rock climbing with friends late at night and thoroughly tired myself out on a few difficult routes. I also did a few pull-ups! (Well, I can still only do about 80% of a pull-up. But hey, progress!)

  - I enjoyed reading more of "Creativity, Inc." before going to sleep and found some more favorite quotes and business management wisdom that I'd like to remember! (Maybe I'll jot it down in my notes tomorrow.)

## Notes on today's workshop

This made my day today! I had the privelege of introducing about twenty women to the world of programming and web development, and they all were very enthusiastic and curious and thankful. Their office was gorgeous too, very modern and minimalist with striking, colorful artwork. It was a very special experience that really bolstered my confidence in myself and rekindled my interest in teaching as a viable career option and future business.

**General notes:**

  - Goals for learning to code included: better communication with developers or clients or content creators, general background info/understanding, building side projects, and making lots of money (half-joking)!

  - Nobody had any specific questions at the beginning, but there were plenty of questions by the end. That's how it usually goes!

  - Most of the students/audience worked in marketing, a couple worked in design or copywriting, and one already did web development.

  - I was so relieved to find that I wasn't that nervous and was able to become completely immersed in the moment again, forgetting all about myself and spending all of my energy and focus on trying to see things from the audience's point of view and building up a mental model of the new information right along with them.

  - I'm still amazed that I can get paid to share with others why I think various topics are cool! It's one of the few things I can think of that could potentially make use of all my interests, from building tools to story-telling to writing to media production to strategic planning to entrepreneurship and volunteer work! Plus, if I don't include curriculum-making (which takes forever but is often a labor of love for me), I'm also happily surprised with my hourly rate as a teacher so far! Maybe I really can make this work as a job or a business eventually.

  - This phrase came to mind for describing how I'm learning to be a better teacher: I'm becoming an expert at being a beginner!

**What worked well:**

  - Showing one of my first websites and talking about AngelFire, Geocities and MySpace pages immediately got people engaged and laughing and sharing their own stories!

  - I'm glad I remembered to mention that my background was also in marketing -- that seemed to surprise people and get everyone's attention for what I said next.

  - Don't skip a quick round of introductions, because that sets a communal and friendly vibe that seems to be very conducive to maintaining the open-mindedness required to start learning something new and embracing a little confusion and frustration.

  - It's OK if I sort of memorize this line, because it worked very well: "This may sound a little cheesy, but it really is an honor to get to share the magic of programming and computer science with you all today, because it's by far the most empowering skill I ever picked up. For me it started out as a hobby, but it's also changed my life -- and that's not an exaggeration!" That's a good thing to mention right after the round of introductions.

  - Starting with sketching a UI mockup and flowchart of the app worked great this time! Maybe I can always start with that even before the slides and general background/theory! Maybe build the UI with HTML first, then talk about the languages and what they're all for, and then finish the flowchart with the logic, and then build it with JavaScript?

  - Definitely show an example of a website with and without CSS, and probably worth it to make a couple slides introducing HTML, CSS and JavaScript and how they can be thought of as layers that build upon each other.

  - Showing CSS Zen Garden open in two tabs, one with CSS (show various themes) and one already *without* CSS worked great. This way I don't distract from the main point by showing the JavaScript trick to remove CSS. Slides or an animated GIF would be great here too.

  - It worked well to do a group Googling challenge at the very beginning, right after showing how to change the background color and text content of an element, so that everyone could dive right in and find out the name of a couple other properties that can be changed.

  - Mention why CSS exists and an example of why it's useful (maybe give a specific example, like show a couple product pages from Amazon, and show part of their site-wide CSS)

  - I'm glad I remembered to mention more general topics, including: the idea of a black box and making peace with not understanding everything but just knowing how to use it, the idea that programmers get paid to be frustrated all day long (but that it's all worth it when you see the thing you built helping real people -- the "aha!" moments when things work are addictive!), the idea of a minimum viable product and iterative development, the importance of separation of concerns (like structure versus presentation), a benchmark for what "a lot" of code is or isn't (since somebody said that 25 lines seemed like a lot), and of course the reality that most of the work and the hardest challenges happen *away* from the computer before you ever write a line of code.
  
**Things to improve:**

  - Make more of an effort to engage people in the back of the room who are always less likely to participate. Is it just because they can't see the screen as well? Is there more I can do to solve that?

  - There *must* be more that I can do to project my voice better and not strain it so much! By the end of every workshop, my voice starts to crack and I start to get embarrassed and self-conscious and worried that I'll lose my voice. I must be doing something wrong. Maybe it's just anxiety leading to tense muscles? Maybe some breathing exercises right before the class would help.

  - Try recording the workshops again and see what I can learn from reviewing it!

  - Maybe invite everyone to contribute by searching online for each of the pieces we need and then bring it all together!

  - Try more than just a number guessing game?

  - This time when I drew the flowchart of the number guessing game, I left a "black box" for all the game logic. But it would be better to still draw out the condition and branching outcomes very clearly, even if I put it on hold and returned to it later.

  - Make a glossary or cheat sheet of common terms and concepts, including: library/framework, Java/JavaScript, diagram of HTML vs CSS vs JavaScript, functions (calling/running/executing), variables, data, strings, objects, conditions, comments, pseudocode, flowchart, UI, UX, black box, API, documentation, events and event listeners, what HTML and CSS stand for, DOM, hierarchy/tree/root, the document object, elements, client, server, HTTP, Agile and iterative development, minimum viable product (MVP), debugging, console logging and other built-in functions, text editors and related terms like syntax highlighting and auto-complete.

  - I should probably make a point of identifying the difference between defining a function and calling/running/executing it.

  - Since client- versus server-side programming always comes up, I should probably have a slide about it or include it in a provided reference sheet!

  - Ideally, I should have more content of my own to share as a next step! Links to resources, tutorials, videos, sample code, etc.

  - Ideally, there should be more of a pipeline for helping people stay in touch and get more involved, like by joining our Slack chatroom, checking the meetup calendar or joining the meetup, signing up for any future paid workshops, etc.

  - Maybe I should introduce some more related tools: text editors and some of their useful features, that Python Tutor website, JS linters, the Chrome debugger, etc.

  - Is there a way to include more of a structured approach or a list of common questions or strategies to help with debugging? Maybe a collaborative list of categories of things that can go wrong?


## Math practice notes

Today I worked a tiny bit more on 8th grade math on Khan Academy -- still at 16% with that curriculum.

  - Today I was going to show my dad that proof for why 0.999... is equal to 1, but I forgot that trick for converting repeating decimals to fractions! So I reviewed it again and did a few practice problems, and now I think I'll *probably* remember the trick.

  - I relearned a good trick for finding square roots: make a factor tree and just look for two matching groups of factors! It also works for cube roots and so on.


## Notes on NodeJS

I reviewed a NodeJS tutorial to fill some more gaps in my server-side JavaScript knowledge, and I even practiced creating some files using Vim! (Because it's just so handy for testing and running small files that I'm going to delete later anyway.)

  - Here's a good quick answer for what NodeJS is: a wrapper around the V8 JavaScript runtime, mostly written in C, great for writing scalable network applications using JavaScript as a server-side language! Note: it's *not* a web framework, and it's *not* multi-threaded.

  - Here's one important difference between the two ways to export Node modules: `module.exports = stuff` will export just *one* thing (object, function, etc), while `exports.thing1 = thing1` will export *multiple* things! The latter will make each thing namespaced, as in `var things = require('./things'); things.thing1();` but the former just imports the stuff directly, as in `var whatevs = require('./stuff'); whatevs();`!

  -  I reviewed the `event` module and recognized the same patterns used in [Socket.io](https://socket.io/) for event emitters and listeners. Neato! I'm just curious about more examples of use cases now.

  - I reviewed readable and writeable streams and learned that the request and response objects created by an HTTP server are themselves streams! (The request object is readable and the response object is writeable.)

  - Readable streams have a `pipe()` method to copy its chunks into some writeable stream -- for example, `request.pipe(response)` will parrot the client's request back to the client as a response, and `fs.createReadStream("filename1.txt").pipe(fs.createWriteStream("filename2.txt"))` will make a copy of a file.

  - Uploading a file in a non-blocking way with NodeJS can be as simple as `request.pipe(fs.createWriteStream("uploadedfile.txt"))`! (Test it with `curl --upload-file originalfile.txt http://localhost:8080`!)


## Gathering string

  - I discovered [Chrome's Dev Tools Extensions Gallery](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools/docs/extensions-gallery) full of lots of cool stuff!

  - My friend showed me how to enable Chrome's Devtools experiments -- so much amazing stuff hidden in there!

  - Try out [prettyjson](https://www.npmjs.com/package/prettyjson) for beautifully formatted JSON in the terminal!

  - [Loaders.css](https://connoratherton.com/loaders): collection of pure CSS loading animations

  - [Probot](https://probot.github.io/): GitHub Apps to automate workflows

  - Found an interesting person on Twitter: [Andrew Teabass](https://twitter.com/teabass), who created a bunch of cool projects I want to take a closer look at later!

  - Read [this article about Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs)](https://stories.wf.com/skys-the-limit/?cid=pd_twt_1708_104086) that support "diverse-owned" small businesses. I didn't know that was a thing!

  - Take another look sometime at this [Auth0 sample app on Glitch](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/auth0?path=README.md:1:0) for user authentication in NodeJS apps.
