---
layout: article
title: "Daily Learning Notes for August 17th, 2017"
permalink: /2017/08/17/
cats:
  - daily
---

Today I woke up on time (7am) and walked over to my usual coworking space first thing in the morning, did some planning for my next workshops, had a nice lunch chat with a new friend, did some math practice and surfed the web, had a nice meal at home and took a nap, did a difficult night hike with a friend, and stayed up late reading in bed.

{% include toc.html %}

## Real-time notes

**8:18am:** I'm proud of myself for finally waking up early again. This time I also took an extra step forward (and outside my comfort zone) by walking to my usual coworking space first thing in the morning. I'll admit I've been feeling quite nervous about returning to this work space; after having quite a few panic attacks here a while back, I've been too scared to return for anything other than a short afternoon workshop. As it is, I'm still not sure I can stay here and work all day, but I'm meeting a friend for the free lunch event happening here today and I'm giving a short announcement at lunch about the next Friday afternoon workshops I'm doing.

Reading today's wakeup message from a friend really cheered me up just now:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Haha this made my day: thanks <a href="https://twitter.com/machikoyasuda">@machikoyasuda</a> for the &quot;word of the day&quot; wakeup message via <a href="https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ">https://t.co/uv4V0ihorJ</a>! :) I feel so crepuscular!</p>&mdash; Liz Krane (@LearningNerd) <a href="https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/898202220218298368">August 17, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Funny how such a small thing can make such a big impact on emotions. Anyway, I've accomplished my first tiny act of bravery for the day: I showed up. I didn't run away. (Not yet, at least.) And I intend to stay here until sometime after lunch. I give myself permission to walk back home after that instead of staying for the full work day -- one small step at a time. I figure if I take it easy and don't have a panic attack, maybe I'll have the courage to come back here tomorrow. I'm already planning to be here on Saturday for a social coding day with a couple friends.

**8:29am:** I'm having another "I can't even" moment -- oh, and I have been logging these thoughts and feelings with my new app! Not sure if it's helping or not yet, but it does make me more aware of just how often it happens and maybe over time I'll spot some patterns that can help me fight it. For now, I do notice that consciously writing down the negative thoughts followed by positive counter-arguments does help sometimes. (Not every time, though.) Just now I jotted down some notes in that log and convinced myself to get back to "Actually, I can!" by focusing on a question I'm curious about and working for just a few minutes to start. 

## Brainstorming for intro to web dev workshop

The question I'm curious about is this: what's the best way to introduce the languages of the web to a group of beginners in just a few minutes? I want to highlight the fundamental ideas without getting bogged down in the details or theory. Here are some ideas for what I can work on:

  - Make something to drive the point home about the metaphor of HTML as structure/skeleton, CSS as presentation/skin, and JavaScript as behaviour/brain. Maybe a slide with a cute graphic or two?

  - Show a real example of before and after for HTML/CSS/JavaScript

  - Show the names of these languages and a short example of the syntax (or is it better to just dive right in to writing some code and let that serve as the example?)

  - Can I get away with mentioning a formal definition of programming languages? Can I mention "Turing complete" or is that already way too much theory?

I think the bare minimum will be to show a real example, and I like the before/after idea. I keep thinking about ambitious ideas for multimedia projects related to this, but I have to reign in my brainstorming a bit and check back in with myself about my goals here.

**Goal recap:** I'm teaching a free workshop tomorrow and a paid workshop on Tuesday which will be my first corporate training type environment, and I want to improve my curriculum. Ultimately, I want to make the *best* first introduction to programming and web dev ever made! But since I don't have that much time, I identified one important piece currently missing from my presentation: an introduction to the bigger picture. So I guess my goal is to have a plan backed up by some slides, links or graphics to give a nice, short big-picture introduction before diving in to creating a tiny web app together as a group.

**Next questions I'm wondering about:**

  - Where exactly do I start now? I feel lost again. Which part of this should I work on first?

  - Should I work on adding these new slides into the previous intro to JavaScript presentation I made with RevealJS? Or should I make a PowerPoint for now? Or should I start on making a tutorial article to replace my slides entirely?

  - Should I start with sketching images, or should I just worry about the wording and write some bullet points or a script first?

**8:51am:** That was 20 minutes of brainstorming and context-setting and fighting my anxiety. I still feel lost and indecisive, but at least I started working on this. The earlier I start wrestling with my early ideas about something, the better. OK, I'm going to start by sketching out ideas on paper -- both pictures and words are allowed -- and I'm not going to let myself get caught up in logistics about how to present the finished product just yet. Then I'll give myself a short break and see where I'm at. I guess I'll check back in with myself at about 10am and see where I'm at by then.

**9:42am:** After some brainstorming, I find myself struggling with anxiety all over again, with the impulse to run away even stronger than when I first arrived here this morning. I know I won't give in to it, but productivity is another matter. Continuing to push forward... I identified one thing that caught my curiosity: how do I actually turn off CSS and/or JavaScript in the browser? (I figured I'd list out the ways I could show the before/after idea to illustrate what HTML, CSS, and JavaScript do. Demonstrating it live in the browser on a real website like [CSS Zen Garden](http://www.csszengarden.com/) sounded like a good idea.) So how do I actually do that? I'll look it up.

Huh, this is less straightforward than I thought! [This StackOverflow thread](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14046738/how-to-disable-css-in-browser-for-testing-purposes) has a couple great suggestions though, like throwing in a quick JavaScript snippet to remove the head element: `document.head.remove();` or from [this other thread](https://superuser.com/questions/447269/is-there-any-way-to-view-a-webpage-without-styles-in-chrome), `document.head.parentNode.removeChild(document.head);` Cool stuff! (Side note: I didn't know there was a [`remove()` method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ChildNode/remove) for child nodes to remove themselves from the DOM. Neato!)

**10:07am:** I was listening to an anxiety podcast while researching that stuff to see if it would help me feel a bit better and more calm by normalizing these feelings, reminding myself that I'm not the only person who experiences this. (Because I find that many of my negative, anxious thoughts while trying to work center on comparing myself to others and feeling like I'm too "broken" or not good enough. Those thoughts quickly escalate into a feeling of hopelessness, thinking that I'll never get better, which can lead to me deciding to give up on my goals and focus on comfort-seeking behavior instead.) Jury's still out on whether listening to these podcasts helps or hurts the situation.

I still feel myself slipping, so I'm thinking about switching to taking care of some admin tasks that I know I can do, just so at least I'm doing something that needed to be done and I'm still here. But is that a form of procrastination right there? Is it an acceptable amount of procrastination? Problem is, I'm not sure what needs to be done for me to feel more prepared to do this workshop. I'm not sure how to make it much better. I'm not sure what to do next. I figured I'll show [CSS Zen Garden](http://www.csszengarden.com/) and then remove the CSS with that quick JavaScript snippet right there in the browser. But what should I work on now?

**10:20am:** Hmm... the biggest problem I see right now is timing and practicing it live. I wish I could practice pieces of the workshop live with real people more like every day, like for just 30 minutes or something. Maybe the next step for me is to practice this out loud, walking through what I want to do and what I want to say. I need to get a better feel for the introduction. The meat of the workshop is already done, since I've improvised it several times and by now I pretty much have the process memorized. But I can't practice that part of it right now while I'm here at this coworking space, surrounded by other people. I guess I'm letting myself stop working on this now, after trying for over an hour. Is that giving up? Eh, I don't know. But at least this counts as a little bit of progress, which is more than I've done many other days recently. I'm here in this space that scares me and I'm practicing staying calm. Now for the next hour, I'll focus on getting some admin tasks out of the way and maybe do some Khan Academy math practice until the next scary thing: the lunch-time announcement and meeting my friend to talk about future meetups and other stuff.

**11:27am:** Done with all the admin stuff that I needed to do today, except for one decision I still can't seem to make: should I host a meetup next Wednesday? Well, I can decide on that later I guess. I don't feel like I have the energy right now. Oh yeah, and then I was going to think about possibly submitting a talk proposal for the Hackaday Superconference, but I don't know. Don't have time now, anyway. Plus it will be time to head downstairs for lunch in a little while. I think I'll just do a little math practice on Khan Academy to see if that will help calm my nerves a bit.

...

**1:34pm:** I had a great lunch chat with that new friend, and it's great to know more women working in tech and have more friends who live nearby! I definitely feel relieved after getting that announcement over with and getting over the nervousness of meeting with someone new. Like usual, I feel energized and motivated afterwards, no matter how anxious I felt beforehand. Instead of running home back to my comfort zone right away, I feel OK to stay here and work for a while. I'm giving myself permission to just do exploratory work the rest of the day. Right now, I'm going to sip a tiny bit of coffee and do more math practice.

**2:41pm:** Just checking in with myself to say hey, it's OK if I spent most of the last hour reading about the geometry of cones and cylinders and pyramids and how they relate to each other. I'm following my curiosity, and in this state of exploratory bliss, I feel absolutely *no* anxiety and it's such a relief! I want this feeling to last forever. I want to feel like this all day every day. I know that isn't possible, but if I could at least feel like this for a few hours each day that would be tremendous progress at this point. Now if only I could transfer this positive energy and sense of calm into my more goal-focused work.

...

**4:42pm:** The last couple hours, I was just surfing the web, reading about interesting stuff, replying to some more emails and messages, talking to a friend at the coworking space, walking home and preparing a late lunch/early dinner. I feel sleepy now and not so inclined to work on the workshop curriculum further, but I'd like to at least get a couple slides sketched out if possible.

**6:02pm:** Oops, I fell asleep for that entire time after meditating! Maybe I needed it though, because it did feel very refreshing. Time to get ready and leave for tonight's hike!


## Math practice notes

Today I *almost* finished 7th grade math on Khan Academy. Just one exercise left to master!

  - I almost forgot how to find the volume of a rectangular prism, but then I remembered it must simply be half the volume of whatever box it would be half of, so one half times the width times the length times the height.

  - I also almost forgot how to find the surface area of a box, but then I remembered that surface areas is simply the sum of the areas of each side. Easy stuff!

  - I *did* forget how to find the volume of a rectangular pyramid. Turns out it's the length times the width times the height divided by *three* for some reason! Why is that? I guess it's related to a [cone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cone), and apparently a cone is just a pyramid with an infinite number of faces around the sides. OK, but why is the volume of a cone equal to one third of the are of its base times its height? Does it have something


## Gathering string

  - To check back on later: this talk coming up at GitHub Universe 2017 sounds just like the project my friend and I were planning to work on! "Learn how David Stolarsky, Software Engineer at the New York Times, built an entire content management system (CMS) using the GitHub API." How cool!

  - Math question for later: why is the volume of a cone equal to one third of the are of its base times its height? Does it have something to do with how triangles have three sides and how a cone is different from a cylinder? How would I write a proof of that, though? Also, read more of the [Wikipedia page on cones](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cone) because there's some very cool stuff in there! (I [shared one bit on Twitter here](https://twitter.com/LearningNerd/status/898297517116465152) today.)

  - Related to the stuff about cones and cylinders above, read more about [Cavalieri's principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cavalieri%27s_principle)!

  - Just found [this awesome system monitoring tool for terminal](https://github.com/aksakalli/gtop)!

  - A nice tutorial written directly on GitHub: [Learn Regex the Easy Way](https://github.com/zeeshanu/learn-regex)

  - [Effective TensorFlor](https://github.com/vahidk/EffectiveTensorflow): some tutorials and best practices

  - [Beautiful Docs](https://github.com/PharkMillups/): links to examples of great documentation!

  - [Turbo.js](https://github.com/turbo/js): a small JavaScript library that uses the GPU for parallel computations
